(DOCSP-15010): Using Change Listeners In Your Components - React Native SDK (#996)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sdk/react-native/examples/use-change-listeners-in-components.txt

.. _react-native-use-listeners-in-components:

=====================================================
Use Change Listeners In Components - React Native SDK
=====================================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

> You can copy our {+realm+} objects to our component's :reactjs:`state

Reviewer: our -> your?

Author: 👍

> <docs/state-and-lifecycle.html>`.  However, since {+realm+} objects are live and

Reviewer: Typically we use "{+service-short+} objects".

Author: 👍

automatically update in response to changes, you must also update the copy of

> {+realm+} objects in state. You can do this by registering a change listener in

Reviewer: Same as above

Author: 👍

> {+realm+} objects in state. You can do this by registering a change listener in

Reviewer: "in state" sounds confusing to me as a non-React developer -- I feel like we should use an article, or "your", something like that to introduce state. Or maybe "state variable" like you've used below? Unless "state" is a well-known object/container in React, which it might be.

Author: State is a fundamental term in react, but I did change the phrasing to be more understandable:

"... since realm objects are live and automatically update in response to changes, **you must update the copies
of them** to prevent your UI from being out of date. You can do this by registering a change listener in your component and updating the state variable when that listener fires. "

> your component and updating the state variable when that listener fires.  

Reviewer: I do like the way that this introduction jumps right into the meat and potatoes of the page, but I wonder if we can draw on some of the language in the JIRA ticket description to make it seem *slightly* less abrupt. Specifically I think the concept of "live object deletions cause issues" is an important one to bring up since it's relatively easy for a developer to understand how an invalid object reference tied to a widget could cause null pointers or invalid access issues.

Author: Added a sentence in the intro that I think captures this:

"However, since Realm objects are live and automatically update in response to changes, you must update the copies of them to prevent your UI from being out of date."

.. warning::

>    Failing to update copies of {+realm+} objects leads to your UI being out of date. 

Reviewer: If you copy information out of live objects into plain old objects, it seems obvious enough that you'll have to manually update those plain old objects that I'm not sure we need a warning here to point that out. Perhaps this is a better place to point out that live objects in state can lead to invalid accesses as collections change and objects are deleted?

Also, {+realm+} should be {+service-short+} here according to our conventions elsewhere in the docs.

Author: * updated {+realm+} to be {+service-short+}
* changed the sentence to "Failing to update copies of {+realm+} objects leads to your UI being out of date as objects are deleted or changed" (I think this captures both the 'what happens if we don't update copies' and the 'when do state copies become invalid').

> Adding Change Listeners to Functional Components

Reviewer: As someone who doesn't know the difference between "functional components" and "class components" (or non-functional components? Are those the same thing?) it might be useful to explain what a functional or class component is in an introductory sentence. Unless we're assuming that all readers already know those definitions -- but even then, it could be useful to at least link to some external reading?

Author: Removed this bit on class components (see the reasoning in [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-realm/pull/996#discussion_r621395094)). 

But just fyi, here's an article illustrating the difference between the two types of components if you're interested: https://www.twilio.com/blog/react-choose-functional-components#:~:text=Just%20like%20in%20their%20names,which%20has%20a%20render%20method.&text=The%20JSX%20to%20render%20will%20be%20returned%20inside%20the%20render%20method.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Declare a state variable for your {+realm+} objects using the

Reviewer: Starting this sentence with "declare" seems a little too strong a command for my liking in the docs. I think I'd prefer an introduction before we get to the prescribed solution, something like "To always keep your UI up-to-date with changes to underlying {+service-short+} objects, ..."?

Author: 👍

:reactjs:`useState() <docs/hooks-state.html>` hook. Within a

> :reactjs:`useEffect() <docs/hooks-effect.html>` hook, set state to the initial

Reviewer: "state" -> "the state variable"?

Author: 👍

> value of your objects and then declare a change listener on the {+realm+} objects.

Reviewer: {+realm+} should be {+service-short+} here according to our conventions elsewhere in the docs.

Author: 👍

Finally, return an anonymous cleanup function that you can use to remove the
change listener and close the realm. Reactjs will call this cleanup function when

> the component unmounts.

Reviewer: Similarly to above, I think we're missing the *why* of this paragraph. I understand that we need to clean up the listener when we're done displaying the object on the UI and no longer need the listener... but that might not be obvious to a reader who's just learning about realm. Also, should "Reactjs" be "ReactJS" or "React.js" or even just "React"?

Author: * Good catch, altered Reactjs to be 'React.js' (proper term is either 'React.js' or 'ReactJS' 👍 
* Also, remember that this is a usage example. Like the other usage examples, this presents a procedure without delving into the why. To learn the why, a user should have read/can read: [React Native SDK > Fundamentals > Change Notifications](https://docs-mongodbcom-staging.corp.mongodb.com/realm/docsworker-xlarge/DOCSP-15010-mutable-objects-react-native/sdk/react-native/fundamentals/live-queries/#change-notifications)

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/rn/using-change-listeners-functional-component.codeblock.using-change-listeners-functional-component.js
   :language: javascript
   :emphasize-lines: 4, 13-17, 29-35

Adding Change Listeners to Class Components
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In your component's constructor, create a :reactjs:`ref

Reviewer: Similar thoughts as above -- I think we should introduce the concept of class components and what we're trying to accomplish before we dive straight into a prescribed solution to a problem.

Author: Removed this bit on class components (see the reasoning in [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-realm/pull/996#discussion_r621395094)).

</refs-and-the-dom.html#creating-refs>` to store your {+realm+} instance. When

> the value of the {+realm+} changes, the component will not re-render, as it would

Reviewer: Maybe we should change "realm" to "underlying data" here, since we're probably not subscribing to changes to all data in the realm but just a subset?

Author: Removed this bit on class components (see the reasoning in [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-realm/pull/996#discussion_r621395094)).

> with a state variable. Declare a state variable to store your {+realm+} objects.

Reviewer: I found this sentence confusing. The previous sentence talks about how we should use a ref instead of a state variable, and how that means our component won't re-render on data changes.  But then this sentence instructs us to declare a state variable for the objects?

Author: Removed this bit on class components (see reasoning in [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-realm/pull/996#discussion_r621395094)). 

But just FYI, what I meant here was that the Realm Instance itself does not need to trigger a UI refresh/rerender. However, changes to the Realm Objects do need to trigger a UI refresh/rerender and thus are stored in state.

Within your :reactjs:`componentDidMount()
<react-component.html#componentdidmount>` method, set state to the initial value

> of your objects and then declare a change listener on the {+realm+} objects.

Reviewer: {+realm+} -> {+service-short+}

Reviewer: Should we explain what to do in the change listener?

Author: Removed this bit on class components (see the reasoning in [this comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-realm/pull/996#discussion_r621395094)).

.. _react-native-use-listeners-in-components:

=====================================================
Use Change Listeners In Components - React Native SDK
=====================================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------
You can copy your {+service-short+} objects to your component's :reactjs:`state
<docs/state-and-lifecycle.html>`. However, since {+service-short+} objects are
live and automatically update in response to changes, you must update the copies
of them to prevent your UI from being out of date. You can do this by
registering a :ref:`change listener <react-native-change-notifications>` in your
component and updating the state variable when that listener fires.  

.. warning::

>    Failing to update copies of {+service-short+} objects leads to your UI being out of date as objects are deleted or changed. 

Reviewer: Similar (but different, for spicyness) reword of "being out of date" phrase:
```suggestion
   Failing to update copies of {+service-short+} objects leads to out-of-date data displayed
   in your UI as objects are deleted or changed.
```

Procedure
~~~~~~~~~
To keep your UI up-to-date with changes to underlying {+service-short+} objects,
declare a state variable for your {+service-short+} objects using the
:reactjs:`useState() <docs/hooks-state.html>` hook.

Within the :reactjs:`useEffect() <docs/hooks-effect.html>` hook, set the state variable to
the initial value of your objects. Then declare a change listener on the
{+service-short+} objects.

Finally, return an anonymous cleanup function that you can use to remove the
change listener and close the {+service-short+}. React.js will call this cleanup function when
the component unmounts.

.. example::

>    In the following example, a developer is creating an application to manage

Reviewer: passive voice
```suggestion
   In the following example, a developer creates an application to manage
```

   tasks. Within a ``TaskList`` component, define a state variable called
   ``tasks``. The developer wants to display the initial list of tasks already
   saved in the database after the component mounts. To do this, they :ref:`open
   a realm <react-native-open-a-local-realm>` within a ``useEffect`` function and
   then set the ``tasks`` state variable to the initial value of the ``tasks``
   stored in the {+service-short+}. 

   The developer registers a change listener to update the state variable when
   changes to the ``tasks`` have been made in the {+client-database+}. The
   developer then creates some additional tasks. 

   Once the component unmounts, the developer wants to unregister the change
   listener. To do this, they return a cleanup function and call ``task.removeAllListeners()``. 
   Finally they :ref:`close the realm <react-native-close-a-realm>`.
   
   .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/rn/using-change-listeners-functional-component.codeblock.using-change-listeners-functional-component.js
      :language: javascript

>       :emphasize-lines: 4, 13-17, 29-35

Reviewer: pro tip: you can use bluehawk with the `:emphasize:` bluehawk command and the `-format rst` command-line option to tag these lines directly in the code sample and generate an entire code-block directive that you can literalinclude here. That way we won't have to worry about emphasizing the right lines when we update this example in the future.
